README.md, before:

# Rich Text OT Type [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ottypes/rich-text.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ottypes/rich-text)

An OT Type for rich text documents.

For documentation on the spec this type implements, see [ottypes/docs](https://github.com/ottypes/docs). Rich Text does not implement the optional `invert`, but does implement `normalize`, tranformCursor, `serialize`, and `deserialize`. Please refer to [ottypes/docs](https://github.com/ottypes/docs) for documentation.

Rich Text uses [quill-delta](https://github.com/quilljs/delta) on the back end.


## Operations

Operations are an Array of changes, each operation describing a singular change to a document. They can be an [`insert`](#insert-operation), [`delete`](#delete-operation) or [`retain`](#retain-operation). Note operations do not take an index. They always describe the change at the current index. Use retains to "keep" or "skip" certain parts of the document.


### Insert Operation

Insert operations have an `insert` key defined. A String value represents inserting text. Any other type represents inserting an embed (however only one level of object comparison will be performed for equality).

In both cases of text and embeds, an optional `attributes` key can be defined with an Object to describe additonal formatting information. Formats can be changed by the [retain](#retain) operation.

```js
// Insert a bolded "Text"
{ insert: "Text", attributes: { bold: true } }

// Insert a link
{ insert: "Google", attributes: { href: 'https://www.google.com' } }

// Insert an embed
{
  insert: { image: 'https://octodex.github.com/images/labtocat.png' },
  attributes: { alt: "Lab Octocat" }
}

// Insert another embed
{
  insert: { video: 'https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMH0bHeiRNg' },
  attributes: {
    width: 420,
    height: 315
  }
}
```

### Delete Operation

Delete operations have a Number `delete` key defined representing the number of characters to delete. All embeds have a length of 1.

```js
// Delete the next 10 characters
{ delete: 10 }
```

### Retain Operation

Retain operations have a Number `retain` key defined representing the number of characters to keep (other libraries might use the name keep or skip). An optional `attributes` key can be defined with an Object to describe formatting changes to the character range. A value of `null` in the `attributes` Object represents removal of that key.

*Note: It is not necessary to retain the last characters of a document as this is implied.*

```js
// Keep the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5 }

// Keep and bold the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5, attributes: { bold: true } }

// Keep and unbold the next 5 characters
// More specifically, remove the bold key in the attributes Object
// in the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5, attributes: { bold: null } }
```


## Commentary

This library was originally implemented as part of a full fledged Google Docs like product called Stypi. Eventually, parts were open sourced--the editor became [Quill](https://github.com/quilljs/quill), the realtime engine became [tandem](https://github.com/tandem/tandem) and the document type became [tandem-core](https://github.com/tandem/tandem-core).

[ShareJS](https://github.com/josephg/ShareJS) was a more established open source realtime collaboration engine, so `tandem` and `tandem-core` were deprecated to unify support under one project. `tandem-core` was rewritten as `rich-text`, to adhere to ShareJS's [OT Type specification](https://github.com/ottypes/docs).

The needs of a realtime rich text document type was formerly a superset of a generalized rich text document type. As Quill has evolved, the reverse is becoming true. This `rich-text` library today provides the interface to use with ShareJS, but the underlying type and fuctionality is implemented in [`quill-delta`](https://github.com/quilljs/delta).

Commit message:

Add metadata wrapper
We're running on a fork of the original
[`rich-text` operational transform type][1]. This is because we have a
need to store metadata on our rich text documents so that we can
determine which book a given piece of content belongs to. We need to
know this so that we can validate a user's access to the content in
middleware.

The alternative to this solution would have been to store a separate
Mongo document that maps a book to all the chapters it owns, requiring a
database lookup every time we submit an op, which would be quite heavy.
This could naturally be eased a bit with caching, but cache invalidation
is generally non-trivial, and storing metadata on the chapter itself
feels more "natural".

The result is an extremely small wrapper around the original type, which
stores a metadata object on the document. Note that intermittent deltas
should remain entirely unaffected, and it will only be stored on
creation, and restored on fetch.

[1]: https://github.com/ottypes/rich-text

README.md, after:

# Rich Text OT Type [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ottypes/rich-text.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ottypes/rich-text)

## Why fork?

We're running on a fork of the original [`rich-text` operational transform type](https://github.com/ottypes/rich-text). This is because we have a need to store metadata on our rich text documents so that we can determine which book a given piece of content belongs to. We need to know this so that we can validate a user's access to the content in middleware.

The alternative to this solution would have been to store a separate Mongo document that maps a book to all the chapters it owns, requiring a database lookup every time we submit an op, which would be quite heavy. This could naturally be eased a bit with caching, but cache invalidation is generally non-trivial, and storing metadata on the chapter itself feels more "natural".

The result is an extremely small wrapper around the original type, which stores a metadata object on the document. Note that intermittent deltas should remain entirely unaffected, and it will only be stored on creation, and restored on fetch.

## Introduction

An OT Type for rich text documents.

For documentation on the spec this type implements, see [ottypes/docs](https://github.com/ottypes/docs). Rich Text does not implement the optional `invert`, but does implement `normalize`, tranformCursor, `serialize`, and `deserialize`. Please refer to [ottypes/docs](https://github.com/ottypes/docs) for documentation.

Rich Text uses [quill-delta](https://github.com/quilljs/delta) on the back end.


## Operations

Operations are an Array of changes, each operation describing a singular change to a document. They can be an [`insert`](#insert-operation), [`delete`](#delete-operation) or [`retain`](#retain-operation). Note operations do not take an index. They always describe the change at the current index. Use retains to "keep" or "skip" certain parts of the document.


### Insert Operation

Insert operations have an `insert` key defined. A String value represents inserting text. Any other type represents inserting an embed (however only one level of object comparison will be performed for equality).

In both cases of text and embeds, an optional `attributes` key can be defined with an Object to describe additonal formatting information. Formats can be changed by the [retain](#retain) operation.

```js
// Insert a bolded "Text"
{ insert: "Text", attributes: { bold: true } }

// Insert a link
{ insert: "Google", attributes: { href: 'https://www.google.com' } }

// Insert an embed
{
  insert: { image: 'https://octodex.github.com/images/labtocat.png' },
  attributes: { alt: "Lab Octocat" }
}

// Insert another embed
{
  insert: { video: 'https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMH0bHeiRNg' },
  attributes: {
    width: 420,
    height: 315
  }
}
```

### Delete Operation

Delete operations have a Number `delete` key defined representing the number of characters to delete. All embeds have a length of 1.

```js
// Delete the next 10 characters
{ delete: 10 }
```

### Retain Operation

Retain operations have a Number `retain` key defined representing the number of characters to keep (other libraries might use the name keep or skip). An optional `attributes` key can be defined with an Object to describe formatting changes to the character range. A value of `null` in the `attributes` Object represents removal of that key.

*Note: It is not necessary to retain the last characters of a document as this is implied.*

```js
// Keep the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5 }

// Keep and bold the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5, attributes: { bold: true } }

// Keep and unbold the next 5 characters
// More specifically, remove the bold key in the attributes Object
// in the next 5 characters
{ retain: 5, attributes: { bold: null } }
```


## Commentary

This library was originally implemented as part of a full fledged Google Docs like product called Stypi. Eventually, parts were open sourced--the editor became [Quill](https://github.com/quilljs/quill), the realtime engine became [tandem](https://github.com/tandem/tandem) and the document type became [tandem-core](https://github.com/tandem/tandem-core).

[ShareJS](https://github.com/josephg/ShareJS) was a more established open source realtime collaboration engine, so `tandem` and `tandem-core` were deprecated to unify support under one project. `tandem-core` was rewritten as `rich-text`, to adhere to ShareJS's [OT Type specification](https://github.com/ottypes/docs).

The needs of a realtime rich text document type was formerly a superset of a generalized rich text document type. As Quill has evolved, the reverse is becoming true. This `rich-text` library today provides the interface to use with ShareJS, but the underlying type and fuctionality is implemented in [`quill-delta`](https://github.com/quilljs/delta).
